---
source_url: "https://nemo-ufes.github.io/gufo/"
type: webpage
title: "gUFO: A Lightweight Implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO)"
captured_at: 2026-07-03T17:19:14.839033+00:00
contributor: "unknown"
---

# gUFO: A Lightweight Implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO)

Source: https://nemo-ufes.github.io/gufo/

---

gUFO: A Lightweight Implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) documented with pyLODE gUFO: A Lightweight Implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) Metadata IRI http://purl.org/nemo/gufo# Creator(s) Almeida, João Paulo A. Falbo, Ricardo A. Guizzardi, Giancarlo Sales, Tiago P. Version Information 1.0.0 License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode Ontology Source RDF (Turtle) Description The objective of gUFO is to provide a lightweight implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [1-5] suitable for Semantic Web OWL 2 DL applications. Intended users are those implementing UFO-based lightweight ontologies that reuse gUFO by specializing and instantiating its elements. There are three implications of the use of the term lightweight. First of all, we have employed little expressive means in an effort to retain computational properties for the resulting OWL ontology. Second, we have selected a subset of UFO-A [1, 2] and UFO-B [3] to include here. In particular, there is minimalistic support for UFO-B (only that which is necessary to establish the participation of objects in events and to capture historical dependence between events). Third, a lightweight ontology, differently from a reference ontology, is designed with the purpose of providing an implementation artifact to structure a knowledge base (or knowledge graph). This has driven a number of pragmatic implementation choices which are discussed in comments annotated to the various elements of this implementation. The 'g' in gUFO stands for gentle. At the same time, "gufo" is the Italian word for "owl". For background information on the reference ontology on which this implementation is based, see: G. Guizzardi, G. Wagner, J. P. A. Almeida, R. S. S. Guizzardi, “Towards ontological foundations for conceptual modeling: The unified foundational ontology (UFO) story,” Applied Ontology (Online), vol. 10, p. 259–271, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/ao-150157 G. Guizzardi, Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models, PhD Thesis, University of Twente, The Netherlands, 2005. https://research.utwente.nl/en/publications/ontological-foundations-for-structural-conceptual-models G. Guizzardi, G. Wagner, R. A. Falbo, R. S. S. Guizzardi, and J. P. A. Almeida, “Towards Ontological Foundations for the Conceptual Modeling of Events,” in Proc. 32th International Conference, ER 2013, 2013, p. 327–341. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41924-9_27 G. Guizzardi, C. M. Fonseca, A. B. Benevides, J. P. A. Almeida, D. Porello, T. P. Sales, “Endurant Types in Ontology-Driven Conceptual Modeling: Towards OntoUML 2.0,” in Conceptual Modeling – 37th International Conference, ER 2018, 2018, p. 136–150. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00847-5_12 C. M. Fonseca, D. Porello, G. Guizzardi, J. P. A. Almeida, and N. Guarino, “Relations in ontology-driven conceptual modeling,” in 38th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2019), LNCS, 2019. v. 11788, 2019, p. 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33223-5_4 Cite this work as: J. P. A. Almeida, G. Guizzardi, T. P. Sales, R. A. Falbo, "gUFO: A Lightweight Implementation of the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO)", 2019, http://purl.org/nemo/doc/gufo This work is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution License CC BY 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode . For the source repository, see: https://github.com/nemo-ufes/gufo Usage Guide Table of Contents 1. Usage Scenarios 2. Taxonomy of Individuals 2.1. Concrete Individuals 2.2. Objects and their parts 2.3. Intrinsic Aspects 2.4. Qualities - Basic patterns 2.5. Qualities - Advanced usage 2.6. Intrinsic Modes 2.7. Extrinsic Aspects 2.8. Events 2.9. Situations 3. Taxonomy of Types 3.1. Endurant Types 3.2. Relationship Types 3.3. Higher-Order Types See also reference table of contents . 1. Usage Scenarios gUFO is intended for reuse in the definition of UFO-based lightweight ontologies. The term "user" will thus be reserved to identify the designers of these ontologies. Reuse of gUFO consists in instantiating and/or specializing the various classes, object properties and data properties defined in the ontology, inheriting from it the domain-independent distinctions of UFO. This section provides an introduction to gUFO as a primer to prospective users. Turtle is used as a syntax for RDF serialization for illustrative purposes. A key feature of UFO (and hence, gUFO) is that it includes two taxonomies: one with classes whose instances are individuals (classes in this taxonomy include gufo:Object, gufo:Event) and another with classes whose instances are types (classes in this taxonomy include gufo:Kind, gufo:Phase, gufo:Category). An overview of these taxonomies in gUFO is shown below. Individual AbstractIndividual ConcreteIndividual Endurant Object Aspect Event Situation Type AbstractIndividualType ConcreteIndividualType EndurantType Sortal Kind Phase Role SubKind NonSortal Category PhaseMixin RoleMixin Mixin EventType SituationType RelationshipType Considering these two taxonomies, the following usage scenarios are envisioned and discussed in this document where appropriate: A UFO-based ontology instantiates gUFO classes in the taxonomy of individuals For example, :Earth rdf:type gufo:Object and :WorldCup1970Final rdf:type gufo:Event . A UFO-based ontology specializes gUFO classes in the taxonomy of individuals For example, :Planet rdfs:subClassOf gufo:Object and :SoccerMatch rdfs:subClassOf gufo:Event . A UFO-based ontology instantiates gUFO classes in the taxonomy of types For example, :Planet rdf:type gufo:Kind , :Child rdf:type gufo:Phase . A UFO-based ontology specializes gUFO classes in the taxonomy of types For example, :PersonPhase rdfs:subClassOf gufo:Phase . Users may combine the various scenarios discussed. For example, users will often employ scenarios 2 and 3 in combination as shown in the following fragment, which defines a "Person" class that specializes gufo:Object and instantiates gufo:Kind: @prefix : &lt;http://purl.org/nemo/example#&gt; . @prefix gufo: &lt;http://purl.org/nemo/gufo#&gt; . :Person rdf:type owl:Class ; rdfs:subClassOf gufo:Object ; rdf:type gufo:Kind . 2. Taxonomy of Individuals The taxonomy of individuals of gUFO has the following overall structure: Individual AbstractIndividual ConcreteIndividual Endurant Object Aspect Event Situation 2.1. Concrete Individuals A gufo:ConcreteIndividual, differently from a gufo:AbstractIndividual, is one that exists in space-time. Concrete individuals comprise objects (the Mount Everest, John, his car, the Brazilian 1988 Constitution), reified aspects of concrete individuals (John's height, his service agreement with Amazon, Inc.), events (the 1986 Mexico City Earthquake, the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference) and situations (the situation in which John weighs 80 kilograms, the situation in which Mary is a professor). Together, objects and aspects form what we call endurants, as they are those concrete individuals that endure in time and may change qualitatively while keeping their identity. A gufo:Aspect is a characteristic or trait of a concrete individual that is itself conceived as an individual. Treating aspects as endurants (i.e., reifying aspects) allows us to consider the properties of aspects themselves, and track their change in time. gUFO includes a number of data and object properties that can be used with concrete individuals. For example, temporal aspects of concrete individuals can be captured with the data properties gufo:hasBeginPointInXSDDate, gufo:hasBeginPointInXSDDateTimeStamp, gufo:hasEndPointInXSDDate and gufo:hasEndPointInXSDDateTimeStamp. In the case of objects (and aspects), these properties determine the time point when the object (or aspect) comes into existence or ceases to exist. In the case of events, these properties determine the time point when the event starts to take place or when it ends. In the case of situations, the
